Bomberman was delveloped by Hudson Soft in 1983.
The fazination results out of the simplicity of the Game. You have too blow up your opponent in a cartoon like world. There is a single player mission but the best part is the multiplayer mode.

Its perfectly suited to Multiplayer Hot Seat because you easily can join or miss several rounds without messing up the hole game.

Because of the short Roundtime you can play it for 10 min or 2 hours.

Its so easy too learn that nearly everybody can understand the basics (and the Rest) in very short time.

Because your friends are nearly your only opponents you are interacting nearly only with them.

This reasons makes Bomberman a computer assisted boardgame with focus on social aspects. Bringing as many people together having fun. This is a good thing.

Why this Release? Why not take an existing?
The first 2 Releases of Bomberman for snes supports up to 4 Players. The next 3 some of them only released in Japan supports up to 5 Players.
For all of them you had to get (or it was shipped) additional equipement. Mainly because the snes only supported only 2 controllers.
(getting it today is nearly as expensive as in the former days)

Saturn Bomberman was a big step forward: It supports: up to 10 Players, nearly all elements of the games before, very customizable.
Considered as the best game in the series. (Some considered it the best Multiplayer game of all time, try to get it)

Bomberman Blast, Bomberman Ultra, Battlefest nice games up to 8 Players.

xbomberbox a "homebrew" project for the xbox up to 4 Players. Funniest and best grafics in my opinion.

This is the console world.

In pc world:
commercial:

Dyna Blaster up to 5 Player runs in dos released 1991-92.

Atomic Bomberman by Interplay 1996 Up to 10 Player support through ipx

non comercial:
windows:
bombzone nice version for windows up to 10 players
windows and *nix:
granatier part of kde
bomberclone
xblast

I like reusing things.

The Reason why old console is expensive is the lack of hardware to support multiple players. The Game is "cheap" and the console too.
What it breaks are the controller + multitaps. You need some of them. That said basic bomberman requires 4 directions and 2 Buttons so nothing fancy at all.
So every controller that you can hook up should work. So reusing a controller is a nice ability. Looking at the mentioned consoles nearly no reuse ability.

I dont want to buy a crippled new computer (console) or (an old one) to play only one game that runs fine on a Celeron 700.

Hudson seems to ignore the pc market (2011). no available up to date Product. For the not so up to date products: I dont want to mess with ipx.

bombzone is very nice and you should try it. But closed source, windows only combined with irregularly Progress. 2d.
granatier is limited to 5 players no joystick support. 2d.
bomberclone and xblast 2d only

Doing a not so outdated *nix 3d bomberman with the focus on hotseat idea and as many players as you like and the ability to evolve and to reuse as much as possible.

My personal opinion: some things are too good not to be composed


